There are six main nutrients in our food : Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, fibre, vitamins and minerals. These nutrients are present in the different food items we eat in differing proportions. Let us learn more about some of them.
Our main need is of energy. It is fulfilled by carbohydrates.  Hence,  our  diet  includes a large proportion of cereals in the form of rice, chapatti or roti, bhakri and bread which contain carbohydrates. Cereals are our staple food.
Proteins We need proteins for the purposes of growth, repairing the wear and tear of the body and for other life processes. We get proteins from the sprouts, milk and milk products, meat and eggs in our food.
Fats : Some part of our energy requirement is also fulfilled by fatty foods such as oil, ghee and butter.
We get energy in the form of heat from the food we eat. Heat is measured in kilocalories. Hence, the energy in food items is also measured in kilocalories (Calories).
Minerals and vitamins
To improve the body’s resistance to disease and for other life processes the body needs vitamins, minerals and fibre in the diet. We obtain these nutrients mainly from vegetables and fruits.
We require vitamins and minerals in small quantities, but their deficiency can lead   to various diseases. Let us learn more about them.
The body needs several inorganic substances. They are called minerals. The table below gives examples of some minerals and provides information about their functions  in the body, the various sources of the  minerals  as  well  as  the  diseases  caused by their deficiency.
Calcium and phosphorous is a mineral which strengthen bones and teeth.
We need proteins for the purposes of growth, repairing the wear and tear of the body and for other life processes. We get proteins from the sprouts, milk and milk products, meat and eggs in our food.
 To improve the body’s resistance to disease and for other life processes the bodyneeds vitamins, minerals and fibre in the diet. We obtain these nutrients mainly from vegetables and fruits. Our main need is of energy. It is fulfilled by carbohydrates.  Hence,  our  diet  includes a large proportion of cereals in the form of rice, chapatti or roti, bhakri and bread which contain carbohydrates. Cereals are our staple food.
Starch turns blackish blue when it comes in contact with iodine. So we can infer that there is starch in the potato. Sago and sweet potato also contain starch. Cereals like jowar, bajra, wheat, rice contain a lot of starch. We obtain flour from these grains. These grains form our staple diet. We get energy from starchy foods. Our body uses this energy for different kind.
Nutrients and foodstuffs. There are six main nutrients in our food : Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, fibre, vitamins and minerals. These nutrients are present in the different food items we eat in differing proportions. Let us learn more about some of them. Energy-giving nutrients - Carbohydrates 7.1 : Foodstuffs 7.2 : Cereals In living things, the process of taking in food and water and using it for growth and other purposes is called ‘nutrition’, and the constituents of food useful for these purposes are called ‘nutrients’. Our main need is of energy. It is fulfilled by carbohydrates. Hence, our diet includes a large proportion of cereals in the form of rice, chapatti or roti, bhakri and bread which contain carbohydrates. Cereals are our staple food. 
Food-stuffs that taste sweet contain different kinds of sugars. For example , we can get jiggery and table sugar from sugarcane because it contains a sugar called sucrose. Ripe fruits like mango, banana, chickoo as also honey and milk also contain various kinds of sugars. They, too, give us energy.
Plants make their own food in sunlight. Plants produce food from water, nutrients in the soil and the carbon dioxide present in the air. This process takes place in the leaves of plants. It is brought about in the presence of sunlight, with the help of the chlorophyll in the leaves. This process of food production is called photosynthesis. During this process, plants give out oxygen. Plants appear mainly green in colour due to the chlorophyll in them.
Living things are made of small units called cells. All the actions and processes in the bodies of living things are brought about with the help of these microscopic cells. Some living things are made of a single cell. These are called unicellular organisms. On the other hand, the living things that   are made of many cells are called multicellular organisms. The amoeba and some other microorganisms are unicellular while man, cow, mouse, cockroach, elephants, banyan tree, the onion plant, etc. are all multicellular organisms.  All the characteristics of living things are seen in every cell of a living thing, whether it is unicellular or multicellular.
A cellular structure Do you know? The lifespan of the giant turtle found on the Galapagos Island in South America is about 170 years. On the other hand, the lifespan of the mayfly ranges from 1 hour to 24 hours. Living things are made of small units called cells. All the actions and processes in the bodies of living things are brought about with the help of these microscopic cells. Some living things are made of a single cell. These are called unicellular organisms. On the other hand, the living things that are made of many cells are called multicellular organisms. The amoeba and some other microorganisms are unicellular while man, cow, mouse, cockroach, elephants, banyan tree, the onion plant, etc. are all multicellular organisms. All the characteristics of living things are seen in every cell of a living thing, whether it is unicellular or multicellular.
Waste substances are formed during the many processes that take place in the bodies of animals. These are called excreta and the process of eliminating them from the body is called excretion. Animals have specific organs for excretion. Plants, too, excrete. For example, some plants shed leaves in a specific season. Waste substances stored in the leaves of plants are shed along with the leaves.
Reproduction Living things produce other living things like themselves. Some animals give birth to their young ones. Some lay eggs. Their young ones hatch out of the eggs. New plants are produced from the seeds, stems or leaves of plants. The process by which a living thing generates a new living thing like itself is called reproduction or procreation. At a certain stage of life, living things become capable of reproduction. Why have so many types of plants and animals been able to survive on the earth even today ?. A mare and her foal Reproduction is a characteristic of living things.
A definite lifespan. At a certain stage of life, living things become capable of reproduction. Later on in life reproduction stage, their organs become weak and still later, their life comes to an end. In other words, living things die. The lifespans of different animals and plants are different. For example, the lifespan of the dog is about 12 to 18 years, while the ostrich lives for 50 years. You may have wondered what exactly the living things are, how they came into being, a
We have learnt that producing another living thing like oneself is called reproduction. A hen lays eggs and hatches them. After a few days, the young chicks hatch out of the eggs. A cow gives birth to a calf. Before that, the calf grows within the cow’s body. According to the mode of reproduction, animals are classified into two types, namely, oviparous animals which lay eggs and viviparous animals which give birth to their young ones. 
Animals with a vertebral column and those without it form two groups known as the vertebrates and invertebrates, respectively. Snakes, birds, fish and kangaroos as also humans are vertebrate animals. Animals such as snails, cockroaches, earthworms do not have a vertebral column and therefore they are invertebrate animals. 2. Name some animals which lay eggs and others which give birth to their young ones. We have learnt that producing another living thing like oneself is called reproduction. A hen lays eggs and hatches them. After a few days, the young chicks hatch out of the eggs. A cow gives birth to a calf. Before that, the calf grows within the cow’s body. According to the mode of reproduction, animals are classified into two types, namely, oviparous animals which lay eggs and viviparous animals which give birth to their young ones.
Shrubs : Some plants grow close to the ground. They give out branches very close to the ground. They are shorter and smaller than trees, but they have a thick and hard stem. The oleander, hibiscus, lantana, koranti and rose are shrubs that may grow up to two to three metres.
Herbs grow 1 to 1.5 metres tall. The stems of herbs are green and quite flexible as
compared to those of trees and bushes. Herbs may live for a few months or up to two years.
Have you seen vines like the pumpkin, the railroad creeper,kavali, watermelon or the grapevine
The lifecycle of plants like jowar, sunflower is completed in one year. These plants are called annuals. The lifecycle of plants like the carrot, beetroot is of two years. They are called biennials. Shrubs like the hibiscus and oleander and trees like mango and gulmohur live for several years and bear flowers and fruit. They are called perennials. According to the period of their lifecycle, plants are classified as annuals, biennials, perennials.
Trees : Some plants grow tall. Their stem, or trunk, is hard and strong. They have branches at some height above the ground. They bear flowers and fruit for many years. Such plants are called trees. Trees are tall, big and perennial, i.e., they live for many years.
Even when a piece of a metal is heated at one place, the whole of it becomes hot. It shows that metals allow heat to flow through them. This property is called thermal conductivity.
Delicate articles, perishable fruits, etc. require packing. To pack TV sets, refrigerators, etc. big cartons and thermocol are being used. All these are man-made substances. These substances are water proof or water resistant, lightweight and easy to transport. That is why, they are being used increasingly.
New Topic biodiversity in evaluation Every living thing gets its food from the environment. Many animals in the environment eat only plants. Other animals eat the animals that live on plants. But plants make their own food in the presence of sunlight using water and the carbon dioxide from the air. It means that plants are the main support of every food chain.
Every living thing gets its food from the environment. Many animals in the environment eat only plants. Other animals eat the animals that live on plants. But plants make their own food in the presence of sunlight using water and the carbon dioxide from the air. It means that plants are the main support of every food chain.
Ball and socket joint : In this type of joint, the bones can move in two or more directions - in a 3600 angle. Examples : shoulder and hip joints.
The skull is formed by the bones of the head and face. The bones of the skull are flat and strong. There are altogether 22 bones in the skull, 8 in the head and 14 in the face. Except for the lower jaw, none of the bones of the skull can move.
The spine is formed by padlock-shaped bones placed straight one above the other. There are altogether 33 bones in the spine, each called a vertebra. These bones are arranged one above the other flexibly. The spine protects the spinal cord that originates from the brain.
The germs of diseases of the intestines like typhoid, cholera, diarrhoea as also of
jaundice, are present in the faeces of the affected person. If the faeces get mixed
with water the germs in it also enter the water. If another person drinks water
which has been contaminated by these germs, they enter his intestines too, and
that person can get the disease. To prevent the spread of disease in this manner, it is
best to avoid washing clothes and bathing in the water sources or defecating on the
banks of the water, etc.
Germs of diseases like the flu or conjunctivitis spread quickly through the
air. So, many people can get such diseases all at one time. If the water of a common
source is contaminated by germs of a disease like cholera, then there is the danger
of all those who drink that water getting the disease. If, at some place, mosquitoes
breed in large numbers then many people there can get malaria.
When disease producing microorganisms enter our body, the body resists
the disease or fights the germs. That is why, many times we do not get a disease even if germs enter our body. Another way to prevent disease is vaccination. Our body develops resistance to a particular disease due to vaccination.
The process by which the seeds are scattered away from the mother plants is called dispersal . Nature has its own ways of dispersal of seeds.
Dispersal by wind – Seeds of certain plants are very light and have wings hair on them . These seeds are easily carried away by wind.
Sycamore Plants has winged seeds that are carried away by wind. Dandelion Seeds have hair that act like a parachute. Wind carries these seeds far away parent plants. The fluff around the cotton seeds helps to float away with the wind.
Dispersal by Animals – Animals & human beings eat some fruits & throw away the seeds, which grow into new plants.  Certain seeds have hooks, stiff hairs or spines which help in their dispersal. Some seeds have spins or hooks. These seeds stick to the body of animals and birds and are carried away from the parent plants. Birds and animals also eat fruits seeds pass through their digestive system undigested and are dispersed to other areas. Squirrels bury seeds and nuts for eating them during winter. Sometimes squirrel forget where they had bury seeds. These seeds often germinate and grow into new plants. 
Dispersal by water – seeds of some plants such as lotus and coconut are spongy or have fibrous covering which help them to float on water. Water transports these seeds from one place to another. Coconuts can travel several thousand kilometers across oceans. the coconut palms on south sea islands grew from coconuts carried there by ocean currents.
Dispersal by Explosion – Fruits of certain plants such as poppy, pea, beans burst open when they are ripe, scattering the seeds in all directions. This mechanism of seeds dispersal is called explosion.
When grain like jowar, wheat is ground into a flour, the particles in the flour are not all alike. When the flour is sifted, we find the larger particles left behind on the sieve. These particles are fine   pieces   of   the   skin   or   bran of the grain.
Bran is a fibrous substance. In the process of digestion, fibre has a special function. Fibrous substances help the food to move forward in the alimentary canal at the right speed. The undigested food is of no use to the body. Fibre helps to form stool from this undigested food. Fibre is also called ‘roughage’.
Fruits and vegetables, especially their skins, whole grains and pulses are all sources of fibre in food. If our food does not contain enough fibre, it can lead to constipation.
Up to now we have learnt about three types of substances present in our food starch, sugar and fibre. These substances are together called carbohydrates. The most important use of carbohydrates is to provide the body with energy.
Just as stones and bricks are the building blocks needed for a wall, proteins are the building blocks of our body. The body undergoes wear and tear continuously. Sometimes, it gets injured. But, the healing and repair of our body goes on all the time without our being aware of it. Proteins are necessary for that purpose. Proteins are required in plenty during the growing years of a person’s life.
All the different daals, pulses, groundnuts, milk and milk products like yoghurt, khoya and paneer, eggs, meat and fish are rich sources of proteins. To get the required proteins, our daily diet  should include daals, pulses as well as milk and milk products.
Minerals : Iron, calcium, sodium, potassium are examples   of   minerals that are essential for the body. They  are needed in very small quantities but they have an important part to play in all the necessary functions of our body.
For   example,   iron   is    necessary for carrying oxygen to different parts of the body. If there is a deficiency of iron in the blood, the body does not get enough supply of oxygen, and one feels constantly weak and tired. This condition is called ‘anaemia’. The mineral calcium makes our bones strong. All kinds of fruits, vegetables, green leafy vegetables, sprouted pulses, their skins and the bran of cereals and pulses are all sources of vitamins and minerals. That is why, as far as possible, we should eat fruits with their skins and we should not sift flour to throw away the bran.
Hold your hand in front of your nose or keep your hand on your chest. What do you feel? If we observe a sleeping dog, what movement of its belly do we see ? Living things need oxygen  in  order to live. Inhaling oxygen and exhaling the carbon dioxide formed in  the  body  due to the use of oxygen is called respiration. Animals such as fish, snake, mouse, etc. have specific organs for respiration. On the other hand, plants  respire  by  means of microscopic pores on their stems and leaves.
Trees : Some plants grow tall. Their stem, or trunk, is hard and strong. They have branches at some height above the ground. They bear flowers and fruit for many years. Such plants are called trees. Trees are tall, big and perennial, i.e., they live for many years.
Electricity flows through metals. All metals are conductors of electricity to a greater or lesser extent. This property is called electrical conductivity.
Even when a piece  of  a  metal  is  heated  at  one place, the whole of it becomes  hot.  It  shows that metals allow heat to flow through them. This property is called thermal conductivity.
Metals have a typical shine or lustre. Every metal has a characteristic colour by which it can    be identified.
When we can look through a substance and see things on the other side, then that substance is said to be transparent. This property of the substance is called transparency. Glass, some types of plastic, clean water and air  are transparent substances.
What will happen if pressure is applied on substances like chalk, brick, alum, glass or a rajgira wadi ? These substances break into small pieces or particles. Such substances are said to be brittle. This property of substances is called brittleness.
Take some cotton wool, pull it apart and look at its edges. What do you observe? The small, thin strands that you see are made up of cotton fibres. Where does this cotton wool come from? It is grown in the fields. Cotton plants are usually grown at places having black soil and warm climate. Can you name some states of our country where cotton is grown? The fruits of the cotton plant are about the size of a lemon. After maturing, the balls burst open and seeds covered with cotton fibres can be seen. Have you ever seen a cotton field that is ready for picking ? It looks like a field covered with snow.
From these bolls, cotton is usually picked by hand. Fibres are then separated from the seeds by combing. This process is called ginning of cotton. Ginning was traditionally done by hand. These days, machines are also used for ginning.
Every living thing gets its food from the environment. Many animals in the environment eat only plants. Other animals eat the animals that live on plants. But plants make their own food in the presence of sunlight using water and the carbon dioxide from the air. It means that plants are the main support of every food chain.
Fabrics are made up of yarns and yarns are further made up of fibres. Where do these fibres come from? The fibres of some fabrics such as cotton, jute, silk and wool are obtained from plants and animals. These are called natural fibres.
The fibres of some fabrics such as cotton, jute, silk and wool are obtained from plants and animals. These are called natural fibres. Cotton and jute are examples of fibres obtained from plants. Wool and silk fibres are obtained from animals. Wool is obtained from the fleece of sheep or goat. It is also obtained from the hair of rabbits, yak and camels. Silk fibre is drawn from the cocoon of silkworm.
For thousands of years natural fibres were the only ones available for making fabrics. In the last hundred years or so, fibres are also made from chemical substances, which are not obtained from plants or animal sources. These are called synthetic fibres. Some examples         of synthetic fibres are polyester, nylon and acrylic.
Have you ever made wicks for oil lamps? What do you use for making these wicks? This cotton wool is also used for filling mattresses, quilts or pillows. Take some cotton wool, pull it apart and look at its edges. What do you observe? The small, thin strands that you see are made up of cotton fibres.
Where does this cotton wool come from? It is grown in the fields. Cotton plants are usually grown at places  having black soil and warm climate. Can  you name some states of our country where cotton is grown? The fruits of the cotton plant (cotton bolls) are about the      size of a lemon. After maturing, the bolls burst open and the seeds covered with cotton fibres can be seen. Have you ever seen a cotton field that is ready for picking? It looks like a field covered with snow.na From these bolls, cotton is usually picked by hand.
Fibres are then separated from the seeds by combing. This process is called ginning of cotton. Ginning was traditionally done by hand (Fig.3.7). These days, machines are also used for ginning.
